Commitments in the Digital Age
No problem frustrates technologists more than trying to determine how long it will take to complete some body of work.  It stands as a stubborn fact that despite over seventy years of trying; research on software project estimation techniques have consistently shown that they all fail miserably at precisely predicting how long the work will take.  Even more frustrating is that research shows the more time spent trying to be precise with estimates the more inaccurate they become.  
While this may seem counter intuitive at first, it turns out that the cause is very simple.  Software development is far more similar to experimental type work rather than traditional predictive work such as construction or managing an assembly line.  While it is perfectly reasonable to ask and hold a general contractor accountable for providing an estimate for how long it will take to build a home, it would seem rather crazy if we asked Thomas Edison how long it would take to invent the light bulb or a medical researcher how long it will take to find a cure for cancer.  
So then, what can we do?  The most effective way to accurately determine and mange how long it will take to complete a specific body of work is to make an estimate and then just start working.  We know that estimate will be wrong. We will learn new things that we didn’t know before. Users may make different requests than we were expecting. So, at regular intervals as we learn more about the work, we will refine the estimate.   
Therein lies a fundamental problem.  How do we make commitments and sign contracts that have a fixed date for when we can deliver?  The recommended solution to this problem is to keep the scope flexible during the delivery.  We must admit and recognize that the original plan and estimates will change over time and some features simply will not make it by the date.  This approach can be met with frustration at times. However, having flexibility works in favor of the organization.  The ability to adjust and pivot what will be delivered empowers the organization to change and even add additional features later in the delivery (as long as we are willing to remove other features of lesser value).  
This method is called “fixed date variable scope”.  It requires courage in making tough choices. It is the leading industry best practice for successfully managing software delivery.  It embraces the reality of software development while empowering the organization to maximize the art of the possible for competitive advantage. 

References:
-	Michael Cohn - Agile Estimating and Planning
-	Larry Maccherone, Impact of Agile Quantified - Late 2014 Edition
-	 “What We Do and Don't Know about Software Development Effort Estimation” – IEEE Volume 31, Issue 2
-	“On using planning poker for estimating user stories” – Journal of Systems and Software, Volume 85, Issue 9
-	“A review of studies on expert estimation of software development effort” – Journal of Systems and Software, Volume 70, Issue 1-2
