Came across this this morning and wanted to share.  Might find it interesting.  

I thought of you when I read this quote from "Sooner Safer Happier: Antipatterns and Patterns for Business Agility" by Jonathan Smart -

"Work Together One simple way to ensure the team is always receiving information is to enable everyone to see what’s happening in their value stream. Kanban boards can produce that outcome, but so can working together. Development is often lonely work, performed by individuals in front of a screen and wearing headphones. Agile pioneer Alistair Cockburn has described product development quite rightly as a “cooperative game,”24 and it can be performed in groups. During pair programming, for example, two programmers sit together. The programmer in the hot seat writes the code while the programmer in the cold seat watches. After a time, they switch roles. Some people have compared pair programming to the roles of driver and navigator in rally driving. The driver focuses on the what and the how while the navigator looks at the what and the why. Not all organizations see pair programming as a clear benefit. Two individuals working on the same task does not mean the loss of 50% productivity. According to studies by Alistair Cockburn and Laurie Williams, pair programming increases development time by about 15%,25 a great example of going slower to go faster, with the benefits of reducing production incidents, improving design quality, lowering staffing risk, enhancing technical skills, improving team communications, and being more enjoyable. It makes work Better, Safer, and Happier—and it ensures that any learning that takes place during that work is shared, which also leads to Sooner and better Value. It leads to collective code ownership and breaks specialization through a shared learning experience. An organization can go even further. Mob programming is an extension of pair programming in which the whole team works together on the same code at the same time at the same computer. Although the practice is rooted in extreme programming, like pair programming it’s not restricted to coding. It can also be used for other types of work like analysis, defining user stories, etc. Creating a Dojo, a place for immersive learning, as US retailer Target has done, can be very valuable for learning together on your own product. It doesn’t have to be any more than a meeting room large enough and equipped enough to enable collaboration. The objective is to learn new skills, whether technical or related to product excellence, through sharing and collaboration with the help of experts and coaches."

Start reading this book for free: https://a.co/dyrDjGI


I thought of you when I read this quote from "Clean Agile: Back to Basics (Robert C. Martin Series)" by Martin Robert C. -

First of all, pairing is optional. No one should be forced to pair. Secondly, pairing is intermittent. There are many good reasons to code alone from time to time. The amount of pairing a team should engage in is 50% or so. That number is not critical. It could be as low as 30% or as much as 80%. For the most part, this is an individual and team choice.

"Pairing is the best way, by far, to share knowledge between team members and prevent knowledge silos from forming. It is the best way to make sure that nobody on the team is indispensable."

Start reading this book for free: https://a.co/9OdjEcO
