It dawned on me this evening that one of the most misunderstood and miscommunicated words in our industry today is the word quality.  We have been trained as consumers that we can get the same item for less by purchasing the store brand, the less fancy product, the item made of cheaper materials...the product of lesser quality.  In agile software development though and especially in literature this perspective, approach, or word would actually be SIMPLICITY.  When we talk about quality in agile software development we are often talking about the disciplines necessary to ensure the product actually works and the ease at which it can be changed.  Thus the communication gap.  Those on one side strive for the cheaper item and see the time spent on quality as a lever that can be pulled.  Those on the other side see quality as indispensable and insist that we focus on making it simpler.  The reality is we are often saying similar things and have the same goal but just using different words and having a different context.  This divide is further exacerbated by those in the technology community that also have this consumerist perspective on quality.  This leads to miscommunication and understanding of those even within the software development space.  How many teams when asked to do work of high-quality hold to keeping things simple?  Do they gold plate their software trying to make it high quality?  How many teams, when asked to produce an MVP, think that the lever they should pull is to cut automated tests, pair programming, or other well-established disciplines of high quality.  No wonder when some are introduced to agile development and read things about high quality they think that it somehow implies the need to spend more money or time.  If you want to get to market faster and save money... high-quality simple software is the way to go.  It beats the low-quality complex software every time.
