One other note I'd like to add to this is there are 3 C's that make good user stories.  The first C is the user story with acceptance criteria should fit on a 3x5 card.  The reason for this is we want to make it super easy to change the product backlog as we learn. Adapting after writing a few short sentences is much easier than having to adapt after having written a user story novel. Plus, things will change by the time we get to the user story. The few sentences will help as reminders for the 2nd C, which is the most important aspect of a good user story - the conversation.
 
User stories, like all product backlog items, are simply placeholder for future conversations.  Good product owners (and teams) write good user stories, but great product owners TELL good stories. It opens the door for having conversations with stakeholders or even customers. Let the verbal telling of stories and conversations drive your development. Remember - user story estimates are not commitments - they are best guesses and we expect the team to continue to learn and improve. High performing scrum teams make only 3 commitments: to accomplishing 1) product and 2) sprint goals and 3) adhering to their standard of quality (aka definition of done). User stories are meant to help us accomplish product and sprint goals.
 
The last C - is confirmation meaning the outcomes of the user story can be confirmed or tested. It's the team's agreement on how they will confirm that the story has been met in an automated, repeatable way. As much testing as possible should be automated. Without automated testing you will not be able to be agile (nimble, adaptive, responsive, etc.).  That's why a key agile principle says "technical excellence and good design enhance agility."
 
Here's a really good summary of the 3 C's (~3 min), if you'd like to learn more.
 
https://youtu.be/ZhbsdabKcHc?si=sb15MrsoG0vYCOm4 
